[docs] policies/deprecation: Migrate Deprecation docs (#126)
moodle/devdocs: general/projects/api/amos.md

---
title: Automated Manipulation of Strings (AMOS)
sidebar_label: AMOS
tags:
  - Language
---

import { ProjectSummary } from '@site/src';

<ProjectSummary
    projectName="api/amos"
/>

<!-- cspell:ignore stringid -->
<!-- cspell:ignore timemodified -->
<!-- cspell:ignore commitmsg -->
<!-- cspell:ignore commithash -->
<!-- cspell:ignore userid -->
<!-- cspell:ignore userinfo -->

**AMOS** stands for Automated Manipulation of Strings. AMOS is a central repository of Moodle strings and their history. It tracks the addition of English strings into Moodle code, gathers translations, handles common translation tasks and generates language packages to be deployed on Moodle servers.

:::info

The name was chosen in honour of [John Amos Comenius](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Amos_Comenius), the author of `Janua linguarum reserata` (Gate to Languages Unlocked), who may be considered the father of modern education.

:::

## AMOS design

This part of the document was the original specification used for development.

### Overall picture

![AMOS workflow](./_files/lang20amosflow.png)

> 1. Developers add new string by adding them into appropriate English $strings array definition file (for example, `/mod/workshop/lang/en/workshop.php`). This file is committed into Moodle main CVS repository as a part of the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Developers add a new string by adding them into appropriate English $strings array definition file (for example, `/mod/workshop/lang/en/workshop.php`). This file is committed into Moodle main Git repository as a part of the code.
```

> 1. CVS repository is mirrored automatically on the fly in a git repository. This git repository is used for further processing because parsing the strings file and tracking their history is much simpler in this system. The whole history is present in the git clone so there is no need to ask CVS server for anything once it is fetched.

Reviewer: No longer need to mention CVS
```suggestion
```

> 1. Git repository is regularly checked for any changes in string definition files. Once a modification is detected, the file is parsed and any addition, modification or removal of a string is recorded in an English strings database, together with a meta-information about the author of the change, timestamp, branch, commit identification (git commit hash) etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The Git repository is regularly checked for any changes in string definition files. If any modification is detected then the file is parsed and any addition, modification, or removal of a string is recorded in an English strings database, together with a meta-information about the author of the change, timestamp, branch, commit identification (git commit hash) and so on.
```

1. Translators use the strings definition stored in the English strings database as a reference for their translation. Therefore the information about the origin (the branch and the revision) of the translated English string can be stored as meta-info together with the translation. Every translated string is linked with a certain revision of the English source so we can easily find strings there were modified in English to be re-checked etc.

> 1. So called translation stage (or cache) is used during the translation. This is similar to the session cache when working with [XMLDB](https://docs.moodle.org/dev/XMLDB). Once the translator is happy with the work, she/he commits (submits) the translation into the database of the translated strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. So called translation stage (or cache) is used during the translation. This is similar to the session cache when working with [XMLDB](https://docs.moodle.org/dev/XMLDB). Once the translator is happy with the work, they submit the translation into the database of the translated strings.
```

> 1. Non-English strings database contains the history of the translation of all Moodle strings in all supported languages. This database is used as a source to generate the up-to-date language package in various formats (ZIP to be deployed at the servers, XML to be used by an external translation tools etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The non-English strings database contains the history of the translation of all Moodle strings in all supported languages. This database is used as a source to generate the up-to-date language package in various formats (ZIP to be deployed at the servers, XML to be used by an external translation tools etc).
```

1. Moodle site administrators update their installed language packs by downloading the ZIP files generated from the database (or, in the future, they can fetch the pack in other format)

### AMOS processes

![AMOS workflow](./_files/lang20amosflow2.png)

> - **Tracking CVS commits**. Run as a cron job. Looks for new/modified/removed strings in Moodle source code (core and contrib) and registers these changes in AMOS database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Tracking Git commits**. Run as a cron job. Looks for new/modified/removed strings in Moodle source code (core and contrib) and registers these changes in the AMOS database.
```

- **Translating strings via web**. AMOS provides an interface for translating stored strings ([MDL-21691](https://tracker.moodle.org/browse/MDL-21691)).
- **Staging**. Strings from various sources end in a [staging area](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Staging_(data)). They are stored here temporarily before they are committed into the main strings table.
- **Committing**. A set of strings in the stage is committed into the main strings table.

Thanks to this design, we have a single interface to get data from stage into the main strings repository. For every supported format/way to get strings, just a class implementing 'stageable' interface is needed to convert the input format into the staging area.

Hierarchy of classes is expected to be available for input processing. For example, the process that tracks commits history in CVS prepares a PHP file with the checkout. So we have a class that is able to convert `array $string[]()` defined in PHP file into staging area. Once we have such class, it can be used to process PHP files uploaded by developers/translators, too.

### Implementation plan

> The implementation proposal evolved from the idea by Petr Skoda [discussed at moodle.org](http://moodle.org/mod/forum/discuss.php?d=118707#p542197). The key point is that translators do not have direct access to the source code repository (CVS) any more. There is a central tool (known as AMOS nowadays) that looks after proper branching and keeping history of the language packs. The current proposal follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation proposal evolved from the idea by Petr Skoda [discussed at moodle.org](http://moodle.org/mod/forum/discuss.php?d=118707#p542197). The key point is that translators do not have direct access to the source code repository (Git) any more. There is a central tool (known as AMOS nowadays) that looks after proper branching and keeping history of the language packs. The current proposal follows.
```

> 1. There is a separate Moodle 2.0 site at http://lang.moodle.org MNet'ed with http://moodle.org. This site is intended for our developers, translators and other community members interested in the translation process. Current Languages forum at Using Moodle can be eventually moved into this new languages portal.

Reviewer: This needs updating.

```suggestion
1. There is a separate Moodle 2.0 site at http://lang.moodle.org MNet'ed with http://moodle.org. This site is intended for our developers, translators and other community members interested in the translation process. Current Languages forum at Using Moodle can be eventually moved into this new languages portal.
```
